A child has no conceptual filter, thus they are making contact with reality directly, interacting with it via their senses not through concepts. 
The same way to understand a bouncy ball they play with it, throw it at a wall and put it in their mouth. Thats how we understand what a thing is
the child has no clue what a bouncy ball is but it will remember how to play with it and how to interact, over time this solidifies into a concept of
what a vouncy ball is, what it can do. you dont bounce the ball anymore because you dont see the point. you have gone from exploring the world of your
senses to a solidifed world of concepts in order to make sense of it and to organise activity. even when you bounce the ball you are thinking about
something else.

this is a natural progression and culturally would be frowned upon if adults walked around doing nothing but bounce balls and eat sweets. Culture is an
operating system that allows a person to exist as a recognised character within that OS based on available types or archetypes, e.g. finance bro.
These act as attractors that we can become in order to share in the benefits of being that character, e.g. i am finance bro so i have x image, i am
likely to act in this way and i can use this to mask parts of myself culture may not look upon well. within each culture there are status symbols,
in west it may be materialistic possessions, a family. in pai it might be the amount of piercings you have or how many retreats you have been on.
The message here is that our sense of self is moulded by culture as it shows us what the socially acceptable characters are and what is off limits.
e.g. me being queer but into football, i push down the queer part because in culture there are no queer footballers. My sense of who i am is formed
by cultural archtypes and my relationship to them and how i interpret my own self in relation to them. This means if i dont algin with a culture i
will feel shame and likely suffer without fully understanding why.

The fire simile:
fire = becoming, the taking of potentiality and igniting it so it becomes an existing thing. e.g. a seed for lust exists, come into contact with an
attractive object, that becomes desireable, you become fixated, this waters the seed and it becomes a plant with the function of fulfilling that desire

fuel / firewood  = whatever i see as me / mine. the potentialities that are able to become / come into existance. anything the mind can cling to
and attach identity to and proliferate the chain of becoming through feeling perception thoughts actions

extinguishing = not death. no longer supplying the fuel that gives rise to endless becoming. its not denying desire its seeing how desire exists 
as a secondary function based on the existing potentials. if there was no potential to feel lust then you would not become a lustful self. 

rebirth = the endless becoming of the self in different states, fulfilling endless desires. e.g. being reborn as a lustful self. Rebirth is endless 
while the fuel has not been extinguished. once you remove the firewood the fire cannot come into existance. in the same way, once you remove craving 
you are not reborn again. this means the mind is still and it is not birthed into a state of becoming. its not talking about life to life rebirth.
Its saying right now if you are hungry you do not become a hungry person and demand food, instead hunger arises and food is eaten, there is no 
identity creation or weaving a narrative involved, no justifying, reinforcing beliefs and the whole structure of 'me' and the world. 

karma = when becoming takes place, i am now a lustful self, i take action as that self and have sex. now what we have done is gone from this primary
notion of craving, felt the desire to relieve it, found a suitable object, become someone who can get that object, acted as that person who got the
object. now we have created that as a pathway as a working solution to deal with the craving. now next time we get it, the mind will follow this route
again. this is karma. now this pathway becomes conditioned / unconscious / default / autopilot. This increases the probability of the same craving 
and mix of initial sensations and conditions leading to the same outcome / action. This solidifies into behaviour and a felt sense of self. This 
pathway continues to operate outside of conscious awareness. This mechanism leads to suffering or happiness dependin on the routes you have programmed.
It constitutes your initial reaction when contacting unpleasant or pleasant sensations and the inclination to certain types of behaviours. Thus, your 
initial reaction to events, sensations is conditioned / being processed by existing habitual pathways. Perhaps i sense a discomfort neautral boredom
and i get the thought i should have a cigarette. I have unconsciously not registered my mind is doing this i just get the resulting urge to smoke
the cigarette and i do. this reinforces the pattern even deeper. this is how your actions affect your future state. the goal is to actively become 
aware of this process and weaken the pathways. you do this by staying with the unpleasant sensation beore it turn into the urge. you then stop feeding
the cyclical mechanism that doesnt resolve anything and recondition the pathway toward a solution where the unpleasant sensation is allowed to arise
and pass away, without action being taken that propogates it. by smoking every time u feel bad, you want a cigarette every time u feel bad. that bad 
feeling is never actually processed because u are escaping it each time it wants to come up and be processed.I am saying , when neautral/unpleasant 
emotion arises, leave the raw feeling and mediate with nicotine + ritual, strengthening the core pathway of avoiding negative sensation.
Thus a conditioned discomfort is being met by conditioned relief, the relief reinforces the need for itself. its a trap. its a cycle. its samsara.

samsara = not a metaphysical realm. it is the cyclic existance that perpetuates itself with no start or end. Unconscious relieving of a wound that by
doing so actually keeps it open. Like having an itchy scab, then picking it so it never heals. Or being thirsty and then drinking saltwater, it 
relieves you for a second until you taste the salt and become even more thirsty. identity gets caught in these traps and stays conditioned by them.
meaning i am now a smoker, i smoke cigarettes when i need a break. not realising this isnt about the cigarettes its about habitaul response to 
sensations and reality. seeing through the loops we are caught in = exiting samsara. you stay with the initial raw dicomfort instead of fueling the 
determined mechanism. me smoking a cigarette increases the likelihood i will have one tomorrow in response to the same stimuli and vice versa.

Ignorance = mistaking I want a cigarette for a conditioned habitual response, i have no say in and already decided based on my previous total actions
or karma or all the habitual patterns i have enacted historically. The ending of ignorance is seeing how this arises. In doing so the spell or the
urge attached to 'i want' 'i am' is weakened because you see the previous links that work to result in that becoming. you notice the intiial raw 
discomfort become the urge to avoid it to the desire for a cigarette to the felt urgency to adhere to the thought + the resistance to the initial
discomfort and the promise of relieving all that. You watch the magic show from backstage and this time are not fooled by the trick. The thought i 
want a cigarette has some space and in this space you remain aware and feel the burn of the initial discomfort. this understanding is the antidote.
craving is not a command. relief is not freedom. choosing relief is choosing to perpetuate the cycle. choosing non-relief is choosing to end the cycle.
choosing relief is to scratch the scab and open the wound. choosing non-relief is being driven crazy by the itch but not touching it and letting it
heal. this second path allows the wound to heal and disappear. 

Nibbana = the wound fully healing. now it is not itchy at all because the scab healed and fell off. you realise how much time you wasted scratching
the scab, prepetuating the healing process, actually causing you more pain and relief cycles instead of just confronting it head on and feeling it 
fully. its like would you rather lift a 2kg weight 1 million times or a 20 kg weight once. the 2kg weight requires no effort but you are stuck doing
it every day for the rest of your life. the 20kg weight you will need to train for. but once you have done it once, the job is done.


The self is a conditioned control-pattern generated by body, feeling, perception, memory, desire, attention and action. When that pattern is misread
as the owner. grasping/becoming/craving starts defending and extending it. birthing this whole process of apprehending things as me and mine, 
proliferating this process out in a world and strengthening its solidity with attachments it also defends. This process gets trapped in conditioned 
loops where it avoids unpleasant things and soothe to get relief. this is samsara. you do not see it because you are inside the loop. you see pain
and then see relief. then repeat. its like a mouse being alone in a cage seeing cheese, eating it and then being electrocuted. but yet the mouse 
carries on doing this because it wants the cheese. 

The second you turn away from the discomfort, the craving becomes a thought, i want a cigarette. the mind resorts to its pathways. the only way you 
undo this is by reconditioning the reaction to the raw sensation. one must ask what is the feeling here I dont want to feel. feel the burn instead
of feed the fire.Only then is it possible to see an unpleasant feeling arise and pass away without immediately grabbing it and trying to relieve it.
instead of picking the scab because its itchy you feel the itch and know that by not itching the scab will heal the wound and there will be no 
further scab or itch.

the process: feeling - craving - grasping - becoming - action - habit - future craving in response to that feeling
the remedy: feeling - knowing / understanidng / staying in contact with the feeling - not feeding the craving - thus cutting off the chain
the result: feeling 

the mind thinks freedom is relief
real freedom is not needing the relief object / activity to be ok

Feeling the burn of non-relief is the only freedom you have and the only path to stop training craving as the master and toiling in samsara

You stop mistaking the mirage for water. You stop endless striving towards an illusory promised reward. you see how the image of the mirage is created
and therefore fully understand that there is no water there. By seeing and understanding this you stop hankering after it. You become disenchanted
by the previous object of craving because you see that there is no true relief given by it, infact it is the very cause of you wanting relief.

You are at the destination already, stop leaving it.
Craving is an inclination, it brings up existance again and again.

When one makes the destruction of craving ones aim, there is nothing more to be done.


